README.md, before:

# HWML
HardWare Modeling Language

# HWML: Hardware Modeling Language

## Abstract

HWML is a declarative, JSON-based language for modeling hardware systems as reactive dataflow graphs.  It enables composition of hardware modules, automatic dependency resolution, and seamless switching between physical hardware and simulation.

## Design Goals

1. **Declarative** - Describe relationships, not procedures
2. **Composable** - Modules combine without glue code
3. **Portable** - Pure JSON serialization, no code in data
4. **Simulable** - Same model runs against hardware or physics simulation
5. **Verifiable** - Static analysis of constraints, units, bounds
6. **Versionable** - Diff-friendly, merge-friendly structure

## Document Structure

A HWML document is a JSON object where each top-level key is a **Module**.

```json
{
  "name": { ... },
  "components": { ... }
}
```

### Reserved Sheet Names

| Name | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `_meta` | Document metadata |
| `_config` | Runtime configuration |
| `_types` | Custom type definitions |

## Modules

A Module is a JSON object where each key is a **Component** name.

```json
{
  "loadCell": {
    "rawAdc": { ... },
    "force": { ... }
  }
}
```

### Module Semantics

- Modules are **namespaces** for cells
- Modules have no inheritance or nesting (flat structure)
- Modules may represent: hardware modules, controllers, safety systems, simulations, UI bindings
- All modules evaluate together in a single reactive graph

## Components

A Component is the fundamental unit. It holds either a static value, a computed formula, or an external input.

### Component Examples

```json
{
  "calibration": { 
    "value": 0.245, 
    "units": "lbs/count",
    "desc": "Load cell calibration factor"
  },
  
  "force": { 
    "formula": "(rawAdc - tare) * calibration", 
    "units": "lbs",
    "clamp": [0, 2000]
  },
  
  "rawAdc": { 
    "input": "hardware", 
    "type": "int", 
    "range": [0, 4095] 
  },
  
  "fault": {
    "function": "force > maxForce",
    "type": "bool",
    "output": "indicator"
  }
}
```

## Functions

Functions are expressions describing component behavior.  Other components are referenced by name.

### References Syntax

| Pattern | Meaning |
|---------|---------|
| `name` | Component in same sheet |
| `module.name` | Component in another module |

### Language

Functions are just strings.  They can be any lamguage you need- e.g. python snippets could be transpiled into a full script that implements the hardware module.

### Recommended Variables

| Variable | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `dt` | float | Time delta since last tick (seconds) |
| `time` | float | Total elapsed time (seconds) |
| `tick` | int | Current tick number |
| `PI` | float | 3.14159... |
| `E` | float | 2.71828... |

### Formula Examples

```json
{
  "error": { "formula": "setpoint - feedback" },
  
  "integral": { 
    "formula": "clamp(prev.integral + error * dt, -1000, 1000)", 
    "state": true 
  },
  
  "output": { 
    "formula": "enabled ? kp * error + ki * integral : 0" 
  },
  
  "velocity": { 
    "formula": "(position - prev.position) / dt" 
  },
  
  "faultLatched": { 
    "formula": "fault || prev.faultLatched", 
    "state": true 
  },
  
  "smoothedForce": {
    "formula": "lowpass(rawForce, prev.smoothedForce, 0.1)",
    "state": true
  }
}
```

## Evaluation Model

### Tick Cycle

Each evaluation tick proceeds as follows:

1. **Inject Inputs** - Hardware, user, and network inputs are written to input components
2. **Build Dependency Graph** - Parse formulas, extract references
3. **Topological Sort** - Order components so dependencies evaluate first
4. **Evaluate** - Compute each formula cell in order
5. **Apply Constraints** - Clamp values, validate ranges
6. **Snapshot State** - Copy state components to `prev` buffer
7. **Emit Outputs** - Send output components to hardware/indicators/logs
8. **Advance Time** - Increment `t` and `tick`, store `dt`

### Dependency Rules

- Self-reference for state requires `prev.` prefix
- Circular dependencies are forbidden and must error at load time
- The runtime MUST detect cycles and report them with the full cycle path

### Evaluation Guarantees

- Components evaluate exactly once per tick
- Evaluation order respects dependencies
- All components see a consistent snapshot (no partial updates visible)
- `prev` values are from the completed previous tick
- First tick: `prev` values are initialized to `value` if present, else `0`/`false`/`""`

### Error Handling

| Error | Behavior |
|-------|----------|
| Undefined reference | Load-time error |
| Circular dependency | Load-time error |
| Division by zero | Runtime: `NaN` or `Infinity` (IEEE 754) |
| Out of range (with range) | Runtime: warning emitted, value unchanged |
| Type mismatch | Runtime: coercion attempted, else `NaN` |

## Metadata Sheet

The optional `_meta` sheet documents the model:

```json
{
  "_meta": {
    "name": { "value": "OsteoStrong Actuator Controller" },
    "version": { "value": "2.1.0" },
    "author": { "value": "Matt" },
    "created": { "value": "2025-01-15" },
    "modified": { "value": "2025-01-17" },
    "description": { "value": "Force-feedback control for linear actuator" },
    "tickRate": { "value": 100, "units": "Hz" },
    "license": { "value": "Proprietary" }
  }
}
```

## Configuration Module

The optional `_config` sheet controls runtime behavior:

```json
{
  "_config": {
    "tickRate": { "value": 100, "units": "Hz", "desc": "Target evaluation rate" },
    "maxTickTime": { "value": 5, "units": "ms", "desc": "Warn if tick exceeds" },
    "allowNaN": { "value": false, "desc": "If false, NaN triggers fault" },
    "logLevel": { "value": "warn", "enum": ["debug", "info", "warn", "error"] },
    "simMode": { "value": false, "desc": "Use simulation sheets for inputs" }
  }
}
```

## Type Definitions Sheet

The optional `_types` sheet defines custom compound types:

```json
{
  "_types": {
    "PIDGains": {
      "value": {
        "fields": {
          "kp": { "type": "float", "default": 1.0 },
          "ki": { "type": "float", "default": 0.0 },
          "kd": { "type": "float", "default": 0.0 }
        }
      }
    },
    "Vector3": {
      "value": {
        "array": "float",
        "length": 3
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Simulation Binding

Simulation sheets provide physics models that substitute for hardware inputs.

### Convention

- Simulation sheet names are prefixed with `sim_`
- They contain `state: true` cells for physical quantities
- They read from controller outputs and write to modeled sensor values

### Binding Modes

In the `_config` sheet:

```json
{
  "_config": {
    "simMode": { "value": true },
    "simBindings": {
      "value": {
        "actuator.position": "sim_actuator.position",
        "actuator.velocity": "sim_actuator.velocity",
        "loadCell.rawAdc": "sim_loadCell.rawAdc"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

When `simMode` is true, input components read from their bound simulation components instead of hardware.

### Example Simulation Module

```json
{
  "sim_actuator": {
    "_desc": { "value": "Linear actuator physics model" },
    
    "mass": { "value": 2.5, "units": "kg" },
    "friction": { "value": 15, "units": "N/(m/s)" },
    "motorConstant": { "value": 50, "units": "N/%" },
    "springK": { "value": 0, "units": "N/m", "desc": "External spring load" },
    
    "motorForce": { 
      "formula": "actuator.command * motorConstant", 
      "units": "N" 
    },
    "frictionForce": { 
      "formula": "-friction * velocity", 
      "units": "N" 
    },
    "springForce": {
      "formula": "-springK * position",
      "units": "N"
    },
    "netForce": { 
      "formula": "motorForce + frictionForce + springForce", 
      "units": "N" 
    },
    "acceleration": { 
      "formula": "netForce / mass", 
      "units": "m/s²" 
    },
    "velocity": { 
      "formula": "prev.velocity + acceleration * dt", 
      "units": "m/s",
      "state": true,
      "clamp": [-0.5, 0.5]
    },
    "position": { 
      "formula": "clamp(prev.position + velocity * dt, 0, 0.5)", 
      "units": "m",
      "state": true
    }
  }
}
```

## Hardware Binding

Hardware adapters map cells to physical I/O.

### Adapter Interface (Informative)

```typescript
interface HardwareAdapter {
  // Called before tick to gather inputs
  readInputs(): Map<string, CellValue>;
  
  // Called after tick to send outputs
  writeOutputs(outputs: Map<string, CellValue>): void;
  
  // Lifecycle
  connect(): Promise<void>;
  disconnect(): Promise<void>;
}
```

### Hardware Mapping Convention

Output cells declare their hardware target:

```json
{
  "pwmCommand": {
    "formula": "clamp(pid.output, 0, 100)",
    "output": "hardware",
    "hw": { "channel": "pwm0", "range": [0, 4095] }
  }
}
```

Input cells declare their hardware source:

```json
{
  "encoderCount": {
    "input": "hardware",
    "type": "int",
    "hw": { "channel": "encoder0", "countsPerRev": 4096 }
  }
}
```

The `hw` object is adapter-specific and opaque to the HWML runtime.

## Units (Informative)

Units are strings for documentation and optional dimensional analysis. Recommended format:

| Unit | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| `mm`, `m`, `in`, `ft` | Length |
| `mm/s`, `m/s` | Velocity |
| `mm/s²`, `m/s²` | Acceleration |
| `N`, `lbs`, `kg` | Force (kg treated as kgf) |
| `Nm`, `lb-ft` | Torque |
| `deg`, `rad` | Angle |
| `deg/s`, `rad/s`, `rpm` | Angular velocity |
| `ms`, `s` | Time |
| `Hz` | Frequency |
| `%` | Percentage (0-100) |
| `count` | Dimensionless integer |
| `V`, `mV` | Voltage |
| `A`, `mA` | Current |

Compound units use `/` and `*`: `lbs/count`, `N*m`, `m/s²`

A conforming implementation MAY perform dimensional analysis and warn on unit mismatches.

## Validation Requirements

A conforming implementation MUST validate:

1. **Schema** - Document conforms to JSON and cell schema
2. **References** - All cell references resolve to existing cells
3. **Cycles** - No circular dependencies exist
4. **Types** - Formula return types are compatible with cell type
5. **Exclusivity** - Each cell has exactly one of: `value`, `formula`, `input`

A conforming implementation SHOULD validate:

1. **Units** - Dimensional consistency in formulas
2. **Ranges** - Initial values within declared ranges
3. **Reachability** - Warn on cells that are never referenced

## File Extension

HWML documents use the `.hwml.json` extension, or simply `.hwml` if tooling supports it.

## MIME Type

`application/vnd.hwml+json`

## Example: Complete System

```json
{
  "_meta": {
    "name": { "value": "Force Feedback Actuator" },
    "version": { "value": "1.0.0" },
    "tickRate": { "value": 100, "units": "Hz" }
  },

  "loadCell": {
    "rawAdc": { "input": "hardware", "type": "int", "range": [0, 4095] },
    "calibration": { "value": 0.245, "units": "lbs/count" },
    "tare": { "value": 892, "units": "count" },
    "force": { 
      "formula": "max(0, (rawAdc - tare) * calibration)", 
      "units": "lbs" 
    }
  },

  "controller": {
    "setpoint": { "input": "user", "value": 0, "units": "lbs", "range": [0, 800] },
    "feedback": { "formula": "loadCell.force", "units": "lbs" },
    
    "kp": { "value": 0.8 },
    "ki": { "value": 0.05 },
    "kd": { "value": 0.02 },
    
    "error": { "formula": "setpoint - feedback" },
    "integral": { 
      "formula": "clamp(prev.integral + error * dt, -500, 500)", 
      "state": true 
    },
    "derivative": { 
      "formula": "dt > 0 ? (error - prev.error) / dt : 0", 
      "state": true 
    },
    "rawOutput": { 
      "formula": "kp * error + ki * integral + kd * derivative" 
    },
    "output": { 
      "formula": "safety.enabled ? clamp(rawOutput, -100, 100) : 0",
      "output": "hardware"
    }
  },

  "actuator": {
    "position": { "input": "hardware", "type": "float", "units": "mm" },
    "velocity": { 
      "formula": "dt > 0 ? (position - prev.position) / dt : 0", 
      "units": "mm/s",
      "state": true
    },
    "command": { "formula": "controller.output", "output": "hardware" }
  },

  "safety": {
    "maxForce": { "value": 800, "units": "lbs" },
    "maxPosition": { "value": 450, "units": "mm" },
    "maxVelocity": { "value": 100, "units": "mm/s" },
    
    "overload": { "formula": "loadCell.force > maxForce" },
    "overtravel": { "formula": "actuator.position > maxPosition" },
    "overspeed": { "formula": "abs(actuator.velocity) > maxVelocity" },
    
    "fault": { "formula": "overload || overtravel || overspeed" },
    "faultLatched": { 
      "formula": "fault || prev.faultLatched", 
      "state": true,
      "output": "indicator"
    },
    "enabled": { 
      "formula": "!faultLatched", 
      "output": "indicator" 
    },
    "reset": { "input": "user", "type": "bool", "value": false }
  },

  "sim_physics": {
    "_active": { "formula": "_config.simMode" },
    "mass": { "value": 5, "units": "kg" },
    "motorK": { "value": 2, "units": "N/%" },
    "damping": { "value": 50, "units": "N/(m/s)" },
    
    "motorForce": { "formula": "actuator.command * motorK", "units": "N" },
    "dampingForce": { "formula": "-damping * velocity", "units": "N" },
    "acceleration": { "formula": "(motorForce + dampingForce) / mass", "units": "m/s²" },
    "velocity": { 
      "formula": "prev.velocity + acceleration * dt", 
      "state": true, 
      "units": "m/s" 
    },
    "position": { 
      "formula": "clamp(prev.position + velocity * dt * 1000, 0, 500)", 
      "state": true, 
      "units": "mm" 
    }
  },

  "_config": {
    "tickRate": { "value": 100, "units": "Hz" },
    "simMode": { "value": false },
    "simBindings": {
      "value": {
        "actuator.position": "sim_physics.position",
        "loadCell.rawAdc": "sim_physics.simAdc"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Appendix A: Grammar (Informative)

Formula grammar in EBNF:

```ebnf
formula     = ternary ;
ternary     = or ( "?" ternary ":" ternary )? ;
or          = and ( "||" and )* ;
and         = equality ( "&&" equality )* ;
equality    = comparison ( ( "==" | "!=" ) comparison )* ;
comparison  = term ( ( "<" | ">" | "<=" | ">=" ) term )* ;
term        = factor ( ( "+" | "-" ) factor )* ;
factor      = exponent ( ( "*" | "/" | "%" ) exponent )* ;
exponent    = unary ( "**" unary )* ;
unary       = ( "!" | "-" ) unary | call ;
call        = primary ( "(" arguments? ")" )* ;
arguments   = formula ( "," formula )* ;
primary     = NUMBER | STRING | BOOL | reference | "(" formula ")" ;
reference   = ( "prev" "." )? IDENT ( "." IDENT )* ;
```

Commit message:

Enhance README with spreadsheet analogy
Added analogy of HWML structure to a spreadsheet.

README.md, after:

# HWML
HardWare Modeling Language

# HWML: Hardware Modeling Language

## Abstract

HWML is a declarative, JSON-based language for modeling hardware systems as reactive dataflow graphs.  It enables composition of hardware modules, automatic dependency resolution, and seamless switching between physical hardware and simulation.

The structure is analogous to a spreadsheet- where hardware modules are like sheets and the components are cells.

## Design Goals

1. **Declarative** - Describe relationships, not procedures
2. **Composable** - Modules combine without glue code
3. **Portable** - Pure JSON serialization, no code in data
4. **Simulable** - Same model runs against hardware or physics simulation
5. **Verifiable** - Static analysis of constraints, units, bounds
6. **Versionable** - Diff-friendly, merge-friendly structure

## Document Structure

A HWML document is a JSON object where each top-level key is a **Module**.

```json
{
  "name": { ... },
  "components": { ... }
}
```

### Reserved Sheet Names

| Name | Purpose |
|------|---------|
| `_meta` | Document metadata |
| `_config` | Runtime configuration |
| `_types` | Custom type definitions |

## Modules

A Module is a JSON object where each key is a **Component** name.

```json
{
  "loadCell": {
    "rawAdc": { ... },
    "force": { ... }
  }
}
```

### Module Semantics

- Modules are **namespaces** for cells
- Modules have no inheritance or nesting (flat structure)
- Modules may represent: hardware modules, controllers, safety systems, simulations, UI bindings
- All modules evaluate together in a single reactive graph

## Components

A Component is the fundamental unit. It holds either a static value, a computed formula, or an external input.

### Component Examples

```json
{
  "calibration": { 
    "value": 0.245, 
    "units": "lbs/count",
    "desc": "Load cell calibration factor"
  },
  
  "force": { 
    "formula": "(rawAdc - tare) * calibration", 
    "units": "lbs",
    "clamp": [0, 2000]
  },
  
  "rawAdc": { 
    "input": "hardware", 
    "type": "int", 
    "range": [0, 4095] 
  },
  
  "fault": {
    "function": "force > maxForce",
    "type": "bool",
    "output": "indicator"
  }
}
```

## Functions

Functions are expressions describing component behavior.  Other components are referenced by name.

### References Syntax

| Pattern | Meaning |
|---------|---------|
| `name` | Component in same sheet |
| `module.name` | Component in another module |

### Language

Functions are just strings.  They can be any lamguage you need- e.g. python snippets could be transpiled into a full script that implements the hardware module.

### Recommended Variables

| Variable | Type | Description |
|----------|------|-------------|
| `dt` | float | Time delta since last tick (seconds) |
| `time` | float | Total elapsed time (seconds) |
| `tick` | int | Current tick number |
| `PI` | float | 3.14159... |
| `E` | float | 2.71828... |

### Formula Examples

```json
{
  "error": { "formula": "setpoint - feedback" },
  
  "integral": { 
    "formula": "clamp(prev.integral + error * dt, -1000, 1000)", 
    "state": true 
  },
  
  "output": { 
    "formula": "enabled ? kp * error + ki * integral : 0" 
  },
  
  "velocity": { 
    "formula": "(position - prev.position) / dt" 
  },
  
  "faultLatched": { 
    "formula": "fault || prev.faultLatched", 
    "state": true 
  },
  
  "smoothedForce": {
    "formula": "lowpass(rawForce, prev.smoothedForce, 0.1)",
    "state": true
  }
}
```

## Evaluation Model

### Tick Cycle

Each evaluation tick proceeds as follows:

1. **Inject Inputs** - Hardware, user, and network inputs are written to input components
2. **Build Dependency Graph** - Parse formulas, extract references
3. **Topological Sort** - Order components so dependencies evaluate first
4. **Evaluate** - Compute each formula cell in order
5. **Apply Constraints** - Clamp values, validate ranges
6. **Snapshot State** - Copy state components to `prev` buffer
7. **Emit Outputs** - Send output components to hardware/indicators/logs
8. **Advance Time** - Increment `t` and `tick`, store `dt`

### Dependency Rules

- Self-reference for state requires `prev.` prefix
- Circular dependencies are forbidden and must error at load time
- The runtime MUST detect cycles and report them with the full cycle path

### Evaluation Guarantees

- Components evaluate exactly once per tick
- Evaluation order respects dependencies
- All components see a consistent snapshot (no partial updates visible)
- `prev` values are from the completed previous tick
- First tick: `prev` values are initialized to `value` if present, else `0`/`false`/`""`

### Error Handling

| Error | Behavior |
|-------|----------|
| Undefined reference | Load-time error |
| Circular dependency | Load-time error |
| Division by zero | Runtime: `NaN` or `Infinity` (IEEE 754) |
| Out of range (with range) | Runtime: warning emitted, value unchanged |
| Type mismatch | Runtime: coercion attempted, else `NaN` |

## Metadata Sheet

The optional `_meta` sheet documents the model:

```json
{
  "_meta": {
    "name": { "value": "OsteoStrong Actuator Controller" },
    "version": { "value": "2.1.0" },
    "author": { "value": "Matt" },
    "created": { "value": "2025-01-15" },
    "modified": { "value": "2025-01-17" },
    "description": { "value": "Force-feedback control for linear actuator" },
    "tickRate": { "value": 100, "units": "Hz" },
    "license": { "value": "Proprietary" }
  }
}
```

## Configuration Module

The optional `_config` sheet controls runtime behavior:

```json
{
  "_config": {
    "tickRate": { "value": 100, "units": "Hz", "desc": "Target evaluation rate" },
    "maxTickTime": { "value": 5, "units": "ms", "desc": "Warn if tick exceeds" },
    "allowNaN": { "value": false, "desc": "If false, NaN triggers fault" },
    "logLevel": { "value": "warn", "enum": ["debug", "info", "warn", "error"] },
    "simMode": { "value": false, "desc": "Use simulation sheets for inputs" }
  }
}
```

## Type Definitions Sheet

The optional `_types` sheet defines custom compound types:

```json
{
  "_types": {
    "PIDGains": {
      "value": {
        "fields": {
          "kp": { "type": "float", "default": 1.0 },
          "ki": { "type": "float", "default": 0.0 },
          "kd": { "type": "float", "default": 0.0 }
        }
      }
    },
    "Vector3": {
      "value": {
        "array": "float",
        "length": 3
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Simulation Binding

Simulation sheets provide physics models that substitute for hardware inputs.

### Convention

- Simulation sheet names are prefixed with `sim_`
- They contain `state: true` cells for physical quantities
- They read from controller outputs and write to modeled sensor values

### Binding Modes

In the `_config` sheet:

```json
{
  "_config": {
    "simMode": { "value": true },
    "simBindings": {
      "value": {
        "actuator.position": "sim_actuator.position",
        "actuator.velocity": "sim_actuator.velocity",
        "loadCell.rawAdc": "sim_loadCell.rawAdc"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

When `simMode` is true, input components read from their bound simulation components instead of hardware.

### Example Simulation Module

```json
{
  "sim_actuator": {
    "_desc": { "value": "Linear actuator physics model" },
    
    "mass": { "value": 2.5, "units": "kg" },
    "friction": { "value": 15, "units": "N/(m/s)" },
    "motorConstant": { "value": 50, "units": "N/%" },
    "springK": { "value": 0, "units": "N/m", "desc": "External spring load" },
    
    "motorForce": { 
      "formula": "actuator.command * motorConstant", 
      "units": "N" 
    },
    "frictionForce": { 
      "formula": "-friction * velocity", 
      "units": "N" 
    },
    "springForce": {
      "formula": "-springK * position",
      "units": "N"
    },
    "netForce": { 
      "formula": "motorForce + frictionForce + springForce", 
      "units": "N" 
    },
    "acceleration": { 
      "formula": "netForce / mass", 
      "units": "m/s²" 
    },
    "velocity": { 
      "formula": "prev.velocity + acceleration * dt", 
      "units": "m/s",
      "state": true,
      "clamp": [-0.5, 0.5]
    },
    "position": { 
      "formula": "clamp(prev.position + velocity * dt, 0, 0.5)", 
      "units": "m",
      "state": true
    }
  }
}
```

## Hardware Binding

Hardware adapters map cells to physical I/O.

### Adapter Interface (Informative)

```typescript
interface HardwareAdapter {
  // Called before tick to gather inputs
  readInputs(): Map<string, CellValue>;
  
  // Called after tick to send outputs
  writeOutputs(outputs: Map<string, CellValue>): void;
  
  // Lifecycle
  connect(): Promise<void>;
  disconnect(): Promise<void>;
}
```

### Hardware Mapping Convention

Output cells declare their hardware target:

```json
{
  "pwmCommand": {
    "formula": "clamp(pid.output, 0, 100)",
    "output": "hardware",
    "hw": { "channel": "pwm0", "range": [0, 4095] }
  }
}
```

Input cells declare their hardware source:

```json
{
  "encoderCount": {
    "input": "hardware",
    "type": "int",
    "hw": { "channel": "encoder0", "countsPerRev": 4096 }
  }
}
```

The `hw` object is adapter-specific and opaque to the HWML runtime.

## Units (Informative)

Units are strings for documentation and optional dimensional analysis. Recommended format:

| Unit | Meaning |
|------|---------|
| `mm`, `m`, `in`, `ft` | Length |
| `mm/s`, `m/s` | Velocity |
| `mm/s²`, `m/s²` | Acceleration |
| `N`, `lbs`, `kg` | Force (kg treated as kgf) |
| `Nm`, `lb-ft` | Torque |
| `deg`, `rad` | Angle |
| `deg/s`, `rad/s`, `rpm` | Angular velocity |
| `ms`, `s` | Time |
| `Hz` | Frequency |
| `%` | Percentage (0-100) |
| `count` | Dimensionless integer |
| `V`, `mV` | Voltage |
| `A`, `mA` | Current |

Compound units use `/` and `*`: `lbs/count`, `N*m`, `m/s²`

A conforming implementation MAY perform dimensional analysis and warn on unit mismatches.

## Validation Requirements

A conforming implementation MUST validate:

1. **Schema** - Document conforms to JSON and cell schema
2. **References** - All cell references resolve to existing cells
3. **Cycles** - No circular dependencies exist
4. **Types** - Formula return types are compatible with cell type
5. **Exclusivity** - Each cell has exactly one of: `value`, `formula`, `input`

A conforming implementation SHOULD validate:

1. **Units** - Dimensional consistency in formulas
2. **Ranges** - Initial values within declared ranges
3. **Reachability** - Warn on cells that are never referenced

## File Extension

HWML documents use the `.hwml.json` extension, or simply `.hwml` if tooling supports it.

## MIME Type

`application/vnd.hwml+json`

## Example: Complete System

```json
{
  "_meta": {
    "name": { "value": "Force Feedback Actuator" },
    "version": { "value": "1.0.0" },
    "tickRate": { "value": 100, "units": "Hz" }
  },

  "loadCell": {
    "rawAdc": { "input": "hardware", "type": "int", "range": [0, 4095] },
    "calibration": { "value": 0.245, "units": "lbs/count" },
    "tare": { "value": 892, "units": "count" },
    "force": { 
      "formula": "max(0, (rawAdc - tare) * calibration)", 
      "units": "lbs" 
    }
  },

  "controller": {
    "setpoint": { "input": "user", "value": 0, "units": "lbs", "range": [0, 800] },
    "feedback": { "formula": "loadCell.force", "units": "lbs" },
    
    "kp": { "value": 0.8 },
    "ki": { "value": 0.05 },
    "kd": { "value": 0.02 },
    
    "error": { "formula": "setpoint - feedback" },
    "integral": { 
      "formula": "clamp(prev.integral + error * dt, -500, 500)", 
      "state": true 
    },
    "derivative": { 
      "formula": "dt > 0 ? (error - prev.error) / dt : 0", 
      "state": true 
    },
    "rawOutput": { 
      "formula": "kp * error + ki * integral + kd * derivative" 
    },
    "output": { 
      "formula": "safety.enabled ? clamp(rawOutput, -100, 100) : 0",
      "output": "hardware"
    }
  },

  "actuator": {
    "position": { "input": "hardware", "type": "float", "units": "mm" },
    "velocity": { 
      "formula": "dt > 0 ? (position - prev.position) / dt : 0", 
      "units": "mm/s",
      "state": true
    },
    "command": { "formula": "controller.output", "output": "hardware" }
  },

  "safety": {
    "maxForce": { "value": 800, "units": "lbs" },
    "maxPosition": { "value": 450, "units": "mm" },
    "maxVelocity": { "value": 100, "units": "mm/s" },
    
    "overload": { "formula": "loadCell.force > maxForce" },
    "overtravel": { "formula": "actuator.position > maxPosition" },
    "overspeed": { "formula": "abs(actuator.velocity) > maxVelocity" },
    
    "fault": { "formula": "overload || overtravel || overspeed" },
    "faultLatched": { 
      "formula": "fault || prev.faultLatched", 
      "state": true,
      "output": "indicator"
    },
    "enabled": { 
      "formula": "!faultLatched", 
      "output": "indicator" 
    },
    "reset": { "input": "user", "type": "bool", "value": false }
  },

  "sim_physics": {
    "_active": { "formula": "_config.simMode" },
    "mass": { "value": 5, "units": "kg" },
    "motorK": { "value": 2, "units": "N/%" },
    "damping": { "value": 50, "units": "N/(m/s)" },
    
    "motorForce": { "formula": "actuator.command * motorK", "units": "N" },
    "dampingForce": { "formula": "-damping * velocity", "units": "N" },
    "acceleration": { "formula": "(motorForce + dampingForce) / mass", "units": "m/s²" },
    "velocity": { 
      "formula": "prev.velocity + acceleration * dt", 
      "state": true, 
      "units": "m/s" 
    },
    "position": { 
      "formula": "clamp(prev.position + velocity * dt * 1000, 0, 500)", 
      "state": true, 
      "units": "mm" 
    }
  },

  "_config": {
    "tickRate": { "value": 100, "units": "Hz" },
    "simMode": { "value": false },
    "simBindings": {
      "value": {
        "actuator.position": "sim_physics.position",
        "loadCell.rawAdc": "sim_physics.simAdc"
      }
    }
  }
}
```

## Appendix A: Grammar (Informative)

Formula grammar in EBNF:

```ebnf
formula     = ternary ;
ternary     = or ( "?" ternary ":" ternary )? ;
or          = and ( "||" and )* ;
and         = equality ( "&&" equality )* ;
equality    = comparison ( ( "==" | "!=" ) comparison )* ;
comparison  = term ( ( "<" | ">" | "<=" | ">=" ) term )* ;
term        = factor ( ( "+" | "-" ) factor )* ;
factor      = exponent ( ( "*" | "/" | "%" ) exponent )* ;
exponent    = unary ( "**" unary )* ;
unary       = ( "!" | "-" ) unary | call ;
call        = primary ( "(" arguments? ")" )* ;
arguments   = formula ( "," formula )* ;
primary     = NUMBER | STRING | BOOL | reference | "(" formula ")" ;
reference   = ( "prev" "." )? IDENT ( "." IDENT )* ;
```
